This is all part of the interview format.
Good afternoon. We're in the office of Marvin
Townsend, city manager of Laredo, Texas. Mr.
Townsend is going to tell us about events in the
history of planning in Corpus Christi during his
years as city manager of Corpus Christi, Texas.
Mr. Townsend, I started out, as you say, making
some assumptions about the role of planning in the
management of the city. Do you want to? Well, I
don't think you can identify and separate
planning from the total staff responsibilities
of the city. So I don't think we can identify what is
caused by planning versus what comes out of the
engineering department or what comes out of the
utility programs as they work on growth or the
staff people responsible for transportation.
It's a team, which the planning responsibility is
to focus on one part of it. We're talking about a lot
of years now. Where do you want to start that
process? Well, why don't we start with your
background and how you came to Corpus Christi and
how you... I know that you worked in the city and
became the city manager. I have a bachelor's
degree in economics from Cornell University and a
master's degree in public administration from
Cornell. The master's degree is with a city
management major. And I wasn't a minor, but I had a
substantial number of planning courses, enough
so that I could have gotten a master's in regional
planning, except for an eight-hour design
course. So I have been actively involved in
planning throughout my whole life. I went to
Corpus Christi in 1956 when I graduated from
college. And I was there until 1982. I was the
assistant city manager beginning in 68. No,
pardon me. In 60. And the city manager began in 68.
Who was the city manager at the time that you were
assistant city manager? Herbert Whitney, who
just died two days ago. I had a telephone call. I was
trying to get straight. It was about his death.
He was city manager from 58 until...
Well, 59 to 68. Now, I
guess all the prior city managers are deceased
now, because Russian Leclerc, the one before
that, has also passed away.
The city in 56 was about 100 and,
let's see, let me work backwards. I've
forgotten exactly, but it was around 100,000
population. And square miles was about 37 square
miles. During that process, it's grown by
annexations and by physical growth to where it's
now. You've got the actual figures, I'm sure, but
it's over 200 square miles of water and about 130,
140 square miles of water. The area that is water is
the Corpus Christi Bay. And Uasis Bay. And Uasis
Bay. And just down into the Gulf of Mexico from the
city of Puerto Angeles down to the national
seashore to protect for offshore drilling, to
regulate offshore drilling. So they go to Madre as
well as Corpus Christi Bay as well as Uasis Bay. OK.
So when you started working with the city, let's
see, the comprehensive plan that was adopted by
the city council was adopted around 53 or 54? Yes,
that was the Bartholomew study, yes. And so where
was the city government as far as implementing
that when you joined? Had it just about been built
out? It was a piece of work that was done. in the
56th, and it left a very definite mark on the city,
but it was basically just a planning document.
There are those, and I imagine the conversation
with Mr. Anderson probably tied everything that
happened to the city back to that Bartholomew
plan. Well, I don't find that to be true at all. It
was a growing city, and it is a growing city, and
they've made accommodations step by step as the
planning process has evolved. But to give you an
example of The Harlan Bartholomew master plan
called for expanding the present airport.
Instead, they built a new airport. Well, there are
those who think the plan was followed that says
that that was all focused because the Bartholomew
plan focused on it. Well, obviously, the
community was focusing on it, and I don't think
that's really even the same solution.
Yes. Thank you. Yes, Louise. OK, here we go again.
Well, there's no doubt that the expressway plan
was a very major change. But see, that wasn't in the
Bartholomew plan in 53 and 54. Well, yeah, because
that was a response to things that occurred later.
I'm just trying to say, though, that to identify a
master plan and say that it caused all these things
or it was the major reason for all these things,
it's just a step in the evolution of the city. Well,
what parts of the growth of the city do you think had
to do with the comprehensive plan at the time that
you were first working in the city? Well, see, I'm
not trying to suggest that having a plan is not an
important part of the process. And it's constant
update. But I mean, the 53 plan did not become the
foundation stone for much of anything. It became a
point of departure for all these things. It
certainly did a good job in bringing things
together. Now, one thing it did do, for sure, it was
the immediate catalyst to the correction of the
railroad problem, which led to the construction
of the harbor bridge and the Tule Lake lift bridge.
That was a very major change, and I think that
probably was kicked off by the Area Development
Committee's participation in that master plan
report, because it set up a technical committee,
and that technical committee involved people
from the Navigation District, which was the port,
and the county, and the city, and the railroads,
and others. And they did work carefully together
to bring that very major change, which other
things might not have followed had that not been
true. But even there, it was a major variation. At
one point, the plan talked about a tunnel, and it
turned out to be a bridge. These are rather
substantial changes. But I think it very clearly
caused that to happen. Now, the rest of it, there
was underway reservoir studies then, and a dam was
constructed shortly after the report was
prepared. But the studies that were ongoing for
that dam were built into the report. So it's the
planning process. It involves all of the
departments, as well as planning as a
coordinating vehicle. Now, when Bill was there,
Bill Anderson, he was the secretary to the
technical committee, and he was right in the
middle of these various actions. And he was
actively involved in the construction of the
first reservoir, the expanded reservoir, Lake
Corpus Christi. Now, which one is Lake Corpus
Christi? OK. It's the same reservoir that was the
old lake, but a new dam was built, which is Wesley
Seal Dam, in front of the old reservoir. and
flooded the old reservoir. And the creation of the
water district made that possible. But see, when
the water district was created then, that's the
Lower Illinois Superior Water Supply District,
it was larger than the city. And today, it doesn't
represent a third of the city, because it has not
grown as the city's annexed and grown. So the
process of orderly growth, the process of having
good subdivision regulations, I think that's
been a very important contribution to planning,
is having subdivision regulations and then
living with them. I think that's been a very
important part, that the subdivisions are
basically laid out well, that there are arterial
streets laid out, that there is a program of curb
and gutter and sidewalks, and the city has gone
into old areas and rebuilt them. I was very much
concerned to tie the reconstruction of the city
and the planning of the city together. I think
historically too many planning departments have
been able to handle new growth and laying out
subdivisions such as this, but really can't come
to grips with the reconstruction of a city,
housing programs, rehabilitation of old
streets, and putting in utilities, and payment
assessment programs, and the kind of hard work
that you have to go through to rejuvenate an old
neighborhood. So you saw that there was not only
planning for new growth in the city, but going back
into the existing city and bringing it up to date.
And I, in fact, bought community development
under planning about
1969 or 70.
There were ordinances for subdivision
development in the city charter? No, the charter
is just a foundation stone. The council has to
adopt ordinances. And those ordinances are
adopted into law under the state platting law,
which I believe is 964 , which says that whenever a
piece of land is divided into two or more parts, The
person divided has to file a plat, and that plat has
to comply with the city's ordinances. And that
plat must show the streets being laid out and the
utilities being dedicated. It must show how all of
the services of the public are going to be
provided, and you have to have access to it. Well,
most cities in Corpus Christi had an ordinance
that went well beyond that and spelled out in great
detail the construction standards and how you had
to build sidewalks and you had to provide fibers
under your acreage for parks and set up a lot of
other requirements. You had to put in sanitary
sewers and storm sewers When was that? Oh, I think
Bill Anderson was probably responsible for the
first one, or the first comprehensive one. I guess
there was one even before that. And I imagine that
the first comprehensive platinum ordinance was
probably adopted in the middle 50s. Middle 50s?
OK. They had one before that. But I mean, I think the
standards were brought up to far, or brought up to
more acceptable levels in the middle 50s. And was
that ever updated? Oh, yes. Is that updated
continually? Yeah, that's right. It's been
changed a lot since then. And what part of the,
would that be part of the planning department?
Yeah, the planning department. And what part, I
realize that the planning department in Corpus
Christi. Oh, that's normally called current
planning, but it was, back to the days we're
talking about it, it was the planning department.
Right. The old planning department was only,
yeah. Bill Anderson, Bob Burr, and I guess Earl
Getz was there. I guess there were about maybe five
people, six people at most. That was in the
mid-50s? Yeah. Okay. And so then... At some time in
the mid-60s, or 1974, maybe we're jumping ahead,
but in 74, you reorganized the...
Offices of the city manager and the deputies. Yes,
yeah. Well, there was once in 74 and once in 80 are
the two dates that I've got. So you were there.
Yeah, I guess that's correct. What do you think?
Oh, I don't know. The days kind of fall together.
You said 70? 74 was one date that I've got. I guess
that's right. I guess I brought... Yeah, we set up
the Department of Planning and Urban Development
in the 74. That was probably right. And included
under planning community development and
planning and something else. I guess we separated
current planning and long-range planning. And
then the change in 80, 81? 80, I think. My date was
80. Then we changed it, and we created a position of
assistant city manager. The assistant city
manager took the place of the director of planning
and urban development. And under that assistant
city manager, other functions were placed, which
included park and recreation, which included the
library, which
included I guess that's it. And there are other
city managers established, assistant city
managers established at the same time. So that
basically we had everybody in the city reporting
to either one of the three assistant city managers
or to the deputy city manager or directly to me. It
was set up so eventually there would have been a
fourth assistant city manager. There isn't now.
It's presently operating with three assistant
city managers. One of those is now. Well, the
deputy manager is now Ernest Briones,
who was the... He didn't go through assistant city
manager. He moved up from director of planning and
urban development
to deputy manager. What were you hoping to
gain, improve, increase in terms of changing the
organization or developing the organization
even more? Well, there's two changes in that
process. One was the matter of the city manager's
span of control being much too large, having some,
I guess, 18 people, probably 20 people, no, I guess
18, something like that, reporting directly to
the city manager. The other, the earlier change,
bringing community development and planning
together, was to make more realistic current
planning. Here you had the community development
program, which I forgot now what the money was, but
$3 or $4 million a year. That process of planning
really wasn't even tied in with the so-called
physical planning of the city. And the planners
really weren't very practical people in terms of
making things happen. And I felt that that tie
needed to be made. We needed to relate housing and
zoning to what's happening out on the street. It
doesn't do any good to be concerned about the
zoning and not be concerned about the condition of
the housing, or the trash on the street, or the
abandoned cars living on property. Just because
the book says the zoning is right doesn't mean that
the living conditions have been corrected. It's
all got to be tied together. And so I felt that the
current planning needed to be tied into the
community development planning, that it had to be
all the same process.
I think that's always been my concern about
planners generally is that they don't seem to
understand that a plan is no good unless you carry
it out. Right, the implementation. When you can't
carry it out, it's in a planning department
someplace. You've got to mix with the operating
people and revise the plans to be realistic and
then carry them out. If they don't get carried out,
they don't do any good. And that's still basically
the problem. For somebody to sit around and draw up
goals programs or draw up plans or draw up master
plans without the ability to implement those
plans and without the organizational ability is
just hot air. Okay. What are some of the things that
you feel were implemented that were most
important to the growth of Corpus Christi? Say,
when you first went in as assistant city manager,
start there. I mean, the things that We know that
Bill left off about the highways and the
transportation and the port. I guess whatever you
saw is important because, right, a plan is a piece
of paper, but what was the implementation that
really affected the purpose? For a long while,
three of the things that were very important to us
was a long-term water supply, which we
accomplished with the construction of Choke
Canyon, if it ever rains in that part of the
country. Well, it sure hasn't in a while. The
reservoir is almost empty. 120 million dollars
worth of reservoir. And a second big... A need was
the need to build a convention facility so that the
city could more actively enter into the
convention business, which we accomplished on
the Bayfront, finally, after several false
starts. Another was the development of Crookston
Beach. which have been allowed to become almost a
slum. Several hurricanes and a lot of hard work. We
got cleaned up pretty much. And we plan to go for it
now. It's pretty much... Is that North Beach or the
beach in front of the Coliseum? North Beach. Okay,
North Beach. But that's called Cochise Beach.
That's the correct name for it. South Beach is
called E Beach. I think we accomplished...
Looking back, the development of Ocean Drive was a
major project during that period of time. What
kind of street should it be, and the fact that we
decided to have a median, and the fact that we
developed some big parks simultaneously to it.
See, for instance, Cole Park and Swanton Park,
those didn't exist. We pushed the seawall out in
the water and then filled in behind them, along the
part of the street, technically. Those two parks
were built as part of the street. They had a seawall
someplace, so we said, why not put it out in the
water? get as much material as we can. In fact, we
dredged in behind coal and we dredged in behind
slander as well as hauling a lot of material.
Right. I remember Coal Park prior to the ocean
drive. It's just that little block that used to
fall off. Yeah, yeah. Well now, that was solely a
city program? Was it at all involved in...
Preserving the open space. We got federal funds to
buy the open space. It's always intrigued me. We
had to back off a couple pieces, because they were
partially developed out in the water. They were
also owned by some very influential people. But I
think the main reason was that they were partly
developed. There was improvements on the water
side. Mrs. Sam Wilson, right there at the
Doddridge or Weber and the Ocean Drive. Yeah. So
owned by somebody else now. properties, which are
out there right by Sauna Park. Just before you get
to it, there's two or four houses enrolled. You got
some finger piers down there. And a house that's
become. a lot of controversy here up here of late
that one house that's on the water side after you
passed the Baptist Church yeah yeah Mr. Henry
Stewart owned it and that was taken out of the
project and even then we just got to approve about
four to three votes uh by city council yeah now if
you go back and ask those councilmen about that
project all think it's wonderful nobody
remembers voting against it well what were some of
their uh objections well buying buying the last
piece of waterfront available for private
development, and that people who bought those
lots ought to be able to develop them, et cetera.
See, the statement in bought, for what today is
peanuts, I think the whole project wasn't over,
I've forgotten the figure, but I think it was over
$400,000, $500,000. Bought. That's amazing.
Every strip of land that was as much as 1,000 foot in
a row, And that's how Doddridge Park, the city had a
little piece of land at Doddridge Park, but
expanded to Doddridge Park or wherever.
Expanded, bought Swantler Park. Swantler was one
of these places like Cole Park where it just fell
off right at the edge of the road. And bought that
whole strip from the Baptist Church in the town.
Now some of it had to be bought because the old Ocean
Drive was so narrow that in putting down the new
Ocean Drive, it had to have some support. And so the
tracks had to be purchased because there was such a
large portion of them being purchased anyway that
we felt, why not buy the whole thing? But we did
successfully carry that out and that certainly
has had a big impact. Obviously the sewer plants
had to be planned and built. And that worked quite
well, even though now it's become quite a problem,
because it had some monumental problems with some
of the contractors. And that sewer plant is
located? Sewer plants, they're all over it. OK,
I'm familiar with one over by Cuyahoga. Yeah, it's
called Cuyahoga. That's the largest now. But the
Broadway, what was the largest, which is right
downtown on the edge of the ship channel, the west
side is on Saratoga and Greenwood. And then
there's the Allison plants out by West Goose Park
out in Annabelle. Right. And there's
two on the far above. There's one on Padre Island.
So all those have developed. In 56, there were two
sewer plants. When was the decision to go ahead
and, or was there a time when there was a decision to
go ahead and add new sewer plants into the city
growth? Well, throughout the whole process. Like
I say, the one out of Saratoga, which was the third
sewer plant built, called the Westside, was built
in the 50s, 60s, 60s. We had one along through
there. And the fourth one was the Allison plant out
by Westwood Park. And then the fifth and sixth ones
were at Florida Bluff. And the seventh out of
Allen. Annexation has been a very important part
of Corpus Christi. Were it not for annexation, it
would be just a new city with much better traffic
right now. And that started back in 54 when they had
the first, well really, I think Billy Anderson
went to Corpus Christi to, one of the purposes was
to straighten out the boundaries, in other words,
to carry out the first annexation there. I don't
mean the first, but there was a substantial
annexation in 54 and 55. And then we carried out a
big one in 61, and that's when Flower Bluff was
annexed, and then Count Allen and H. Willis Midway
was annexed. And that caused a lot of grief. Where
did he live there? Up until 70. OK. I'm sure you've
heard a lot about the . And then, because those were
so large, then there were just a bunch of filling
annexations for the next decade. But of course,
now the annexations are gradually going forward
until they include a substantial part of Padre
Island now, mostly developed area of Padre Island
inside the city, as well as the area out the
Orangeville Highway, which is out west of
Calhoun. Right. When did the annexation start? at
Padre Island beginning in the 70s or late? Well,
Flora Bluff was annexed in 61. OK, Flora Bluff. Was
annexed in 61. And then the causeway was annexed as
part of Laguna Madre. You see, the whole of Laguna
Madre was annexed to control oil and gas
exploration. It would require storm shoulders.
It would require spacing so that the would be too
close together. It would require that the
platform be a certain distance off the shore and
such as this. And then the first Padre Island
annexation happened in the 80s. So
that's been very recent. Yeah. That's just about .
We were having a public meeting . OK. Same with the
Orange Grove Highway. Now, you understand what I
mean by that? You know where Calhoun is? Yeah.
Well, this is on west of Calhoun. Right. Yeah. As a
matter of fact, I just drove that highway
yesterday. Coming here? Yeah, coming in this way.
Okay, that's not the fastest way. That's all
right. Where are you coming from? Well, I was
coming from College Station. Oh, all right. Well,
I always take a different route. That's okay. So I
went through Tynan and Orange Grove on towards
Alice. And the Orange Grove Highway is 181? No.
Coming into Corpus Christi? No, that's the beach
highway. 624. Okay. Yeah.
Thank you. Carlos? Okay, where were we? Well, I
want to ask you about, you talked about the
reconstruction in the internal part of the city,
and I want to ask you about the attitudes towards
urban renewal in Corpus Christi, because I
understood that there weren't any federal urban
renewal. Yeah, urban renewal kind of was an idea
whose time came and went. Now, how it would have
changed the city, had the city taken advantage of
it, I don't know, looking back, I mean, maybe we
would have gotten some neighborhoods restored
earlier. The big problem with urban renewal was
clearance. And who knows now what would have
happened if the election in 1959 had passed. I've
forgotten the date of the second election. Which
election was that? Well, the first urban renewal
election was in 59. In Corpus Christi? Yes. Okay,
that was like... A city-wide bond. Right. It
failed, I think, four to one or something like
that. Well, no, in Texas, in order to have urban
renewal, you had to have voter approval. You had to
take the concept, not the project, but the concept
to the voters. And then we went back to the voters
again in 19, and I have to check the date. I would
guess 67, 8, 9, 6, someplace along there. And it
failed the I guess the first one failed four and a
half to one, and the second one failed four to one.
It was enough so that I said to my wife, at this rate,
we have to have nine more elections before it'll
pass. It was the kind of thing where all the
so-called good guys in town were in favor of it, the
Chamber of Commerce, all the civic clubs, but it
still failed that badly. Of course, the reason was
that you can't pass something on a concept. I
remember one old man, I talked to him for an hour,
but he'd been given a map by the opposition And the
map was the map of the area of substandard housing.
He'd been told in that meeting by the opposition
that if your house was in the gray area, it went.
Clearance, total clearance. And even though this
guy had a lot of respect for me, and we talked for an
hour, at the end he said, but Marvin, my house is in
the gray area. And that was the story of urban
renewal in Purpose 50. To me, that one little
comment just tells it all. I mean, it never passed
because the lies were so easy to make and the
program based upon philosophy could never pass.
What did you say the advantages would have been to
the city? Well, like the project that was the first
proposed project took the oldest part of the city
in a very rundown park called the, some called it
the Cut, basically the area between the
expressway and the Broadway and adjacent to the
sewer plant and back over to Port Avenue. Right.
And converted that into a complete redevelopment
area. Now, what do you need, Bob? I just wanted to
know, are we playing games with the court
tomorrow? Tax cases? Gosh, I don't know. What
cases are set tomorrow? I thought you might know.
I'll call one of the lawyers and ask them. Flo
should be around. Is he in the tax office? I haven't
checked. Oh. I always love the Uber. OK. That's
fine. OK. Ah, where was I? OK, so the first project
for urban renewal was proposed for that area,
between Rob and I. Yeah, in what later became the
Coles High Alco area. And I don't know what would
happen if it had been approved. The concept was
almost total clearance. It was going to be
redeveloped with some apartments and some single
family housing around the cemetery and some
existing churches. They're still now, 25 years
later, working in that same neighborhood with CD
money. And finally got, well, I haven't been back,
but I think all the streets are now reconstructed.
And there's still some pretty bad slums in that
neighborhood, though. And after a renewal went
down the second time, a 221 project, which is a
housing project owned by a nonprofit
corporation, but still basically,
well, it's A lot of people have Section 8 housing
assistance grants to let them live there. But they
went in with the city's cooperation that bought
the worst four blocks in the slums and built a
cooperative project with the St. Matthew's
Baptist Church acting as one of the key sponsors
for it. So I don't know whether it would have
changed dramatically. I'm sure that those kind of
things would have happened a lot faster with urban
renewal because it would have been a get in, get out
kind of thing. I know that some of the projects now
where they're working on the city hall site, for
instance, and the courthouse site, those tracks
might well have been bought and cleared quickly
with urban renewal, and maybe those improvements
could have been built ten years ago. That's what
would have happened there, and maybe the city hall
and courthouse would be being built someplace
else. I don't particularly agree with where the
city hall is being built. In fact, I think it's
wrong. So it's who knows what the right solution
would have been. But all of those things evolve as
the city grows, and there's no one process. To me,
the process of planning is to be at the front in that
evolving and to see that in fact as much
information as is possible goes into the process
and not a bunch of off-the-cuff opinions. A lot of
planners think that because they're a planner
they can make some grandiose comment about
something and it's supposed to be good because
they say it's good. And if they can't support what
they're saying then their views are no different
than the man on the street. The planner's got to be
prepared and put hard, logical reasoning behind
what he says, and then help that department head
carry it out. Right. So one of your major concerns
is how do you get a plan off the paper into the actual
construction? Yeah, and the actual
construction, and the other way around, too.
Thank you, ma'am.
Well, how did the city approach the
reconstruction then in the older parts? Was there
a plan? I mean, in a plan, what was the method for
approaching that reconstruction? Well, the
difference between urban renewal and non-urban
renewal is the difference between massive reuse
of land versus rehabilitation of existing uses.
Urban renewal lets you go in and clear so you can
rearrange street patterns. And you could regroup
the properties. You didn't have to accept the
subdivisions as they were laid out. You could
start over again. So without that, you have to go
about it the other way. You have to go in and
rehabilitate it as it sits. So there are still some
land use problems in Corpus Christi that will
never be solved by current techniques. There's a
little subdivision off of Port Avenue called
Industrial Boulevard. There's another one
that's, I've forgotten the name of it, but it runs
off of the port at the curb, runs back toward Agnes,
where you have a tough mix of industrial uses and
single-family houses. It's surrounded by a
cement plant, or it was a cement plant on one side, I
think it's probably vacant now, railroad track at
the other side, and a great big cotton compress on
the third side, and Port Avenue on the fourth side.
It's only three lots deep, and four lots deep
maybe, and probably have 200 lots in all together.
That is a tough land use problem that all the
rehabilitation money in the world will probably
never really solve. At some time, maybe the
private uses will buy it out and turn it into all
industry. But right now, it's home for a lot of
people, and they've lived there for years, and yet
there's slums. So that's the kind of land use
problem that without the tools of urban renewal,
it's kind of hard to solve. But many other
subdivisions have been solved very nicely.
Molina, behind the golf center, was a slum partly
because of the influence of Cliff Moss Airfield,
which was the old airport, and partly because it
was a poor neighborhood in a very poor area. It was
kind of a poor school district that was largely
controlled by the farmers and the ranchers. Do you
know where Molina was? Do you know where Horn Road
is? Yeah. Well, Horn Road is now between the Golf
Center and Molina. It used to be between the
airport and Molina. But Molina in 56 had some dirt
roads, no curb and gutter, standing ditches, no
drainage, no sewer. So it was little two inch water
lines or even smaller. And the city went in there
and completely redid that subdivision. Built big
storm sewers, big open concrete channels that run
all the way to Oso Creek to drain it, and then put in
sanitary sewers that ran down to the sewer plant I
was telling you about before, the west side plant,
and then went in with the two basics done
underground, went in and replaced the water lines
and replaced the gas lines and put in pavement with
curb and gutter, and went in at the same time with
what's called concentrated code enforcement,
where HUD loans were available as well as city
loans to rehabilitate the houses and get rid of the
privies and connect the people to city sewer as
well as improve their houses. So it was a combined
effort, and it's been quite successful. If you
look at Molina now, it's nowhere near, it's still
not probably not the place you'd pick to live, but I
mean it's basically a subdivision of controlled
land use, and most of the houses are now up to
standard. And that's not just, I'm picking
Molina, but it was true in Gardendale. You know
Gardendale? Probably. I'm not sure. Gardendale
went from Staples to Everhart. Okay, yeah. The
roads are... Betty Jean, and Nelson, and Burton,
and Williams Drive. Anyway, they run it from the
railroad track back to Blanche Moore's property.
You know that big track on Padre Island Drive
that's undeveloped from Everhart to Staples? And
Blanche Moore's school sits on the other side of
it? Well, that's Gardendale. That whole side of it
is back there. Around the 50s, Gardenville had no
sewer, had little two-inch water lines, had open
ditches on both sides of the streets. Some of the
streets were in very bad shape, had bad gas lines,
very huge stop signs, very huge street lights. And
Reed did the whole subject. Got the property
owners to participate on the sewer lines and make
connections to the sewer system. And Gardendale
is now almost a standard subdivision. In fact, of
course, there was other factors involved with
Gardendale, because you had tremendously
expensive improvements around it, which just
kind of made those big lots in Gardendale also
quite advantageous for the person that wanted
some space, but couldn't afford to buy a big lot in
Country Club. So all those things were happening,
and I think that basically through the 50s and 60s,
the 60s maybe, and the 70s, the city got rid of many,
many, many problems that had existed in the World
War II development. In terms of the physical
layout of the city and the services that the city
could provide for its residents. Yeah, the
standard of housing, the standard of support for
the people who lived there, the basic
fundamentals, park improvements, water and
sewer, and gas, and other fundamentals. I know
it's getting late, but could you just real briefly
touch on the role of zoning in being able to bring
about some of those changes? Were areas re-zoned?
To me, zoning is so fundamental. We just adopted
zoning here six months ago. And Houston, they were
in it. Well, Houston is going to suffer, too,
deeply, because they were able to grow fast enough
that they could replace the sins of the first tier
of development by the great magnitudes of the
second tier of development as the great buildings
came down upon the slums. But you notice that
stopped. And you now got that entire around
Houston of pretty sick slums that didn't want to go
anyplace. Nobody was going to buy those out.
You've got growth beyond the expressway, and
you've got the center city growth. And that's the
big problem is it doesn't have any zoning. And you
go in that middle area, some things you just can't
believe. Burned out structures that have been
there for years that just left alone because in
that twilight zone, they can't really restore
those houses. And they don't want to. It's got to
demand as business investment. But were there
areas like that in Corpus Christi? No. didn't
leave that opportunity. When Bill Anderson went
to Corpus Christi in 54, I guess he did, maybe. Is
that the date? He said it was in the early 50s,
mid-50s. Maybe 53. But let's say it's 54.
Basically, the city was out to Louisiana.
I moved into a house in the
You know where Louisiana meets Staples? Right. I
moved into a house four doors down from that
corner. And they were just pavement staples at
that time. Staples was just a two lane canyon road.
And that's 56.
So most of the subdivisions that are there now
weren't there. All the south side had not
developed. The city didn't go across Potter
Island Drive except Gardendale.
The city was not connected out to Calhoun and the
Phyllis Midway and those areas. Was the city at
that time using zoning? Yeah, it said zoning for
years. Bill might have had a hand in making the
first zoning ordinance, but I think it might have
even predated him. I know he helped to improve it.
But I think you'll find almost all of Cork City's
growth has been under the guidance of zoning. Now,
it's only when it was followed. And the exception
to those always seemed to exaggerate the rules, so
to speak. Just because there's a plan for
Everhart, for instance. Everhart's the worst
example. Everhart, and the plan was to be a feeder
street. Which plan is it? The so-called Everhart
plan, which is a special plan for Everhart.
Everhart's only plan. But the Everhart Zoning
Plan said that it was to be basically just a
residential street with some offices and some
apartments. No, not even offices. Just a
residential street, really, serving as a
collector. And the two majors are supposed to be
Weber and Staples, with good reason. Both Weber
and Staples go across Oso Creek and feed in. And
they also come on through to Ocean Drive.
Staples, of course, because it's the main street
all the way through town. Staples is the only
street that goes from the ship channel to out
beyond the city limits.
But people came in to try to make Everhart, to
convert the lots into businesses, into offices.
And so one by one, Everhart fell. Did they apply for
zoning variances or variances to the zoning plan?
No, it was just rezoning. It was just rezoning.
Residential uses. Of course, the problem was that
Everhart, when it was laid out, was laid out with a
lot of residential lots facing the street. So
those were prime suspects to get rezoned. Who's
going to want to buy a house on Everhart facing the
street with all the traffic, and the kids can't
move here, and you can't rob me of my investment. I
need to be able to convert it into an office. So one
by one, the street turned. Everhart went down. But
that's by their choice. I can sit back from
perspective and say that they're all going to be
starved. Because already the 80s have already
told them that. If you go to the Corpus Christi
right now, you'll see that Weber and Staples are
getting the substantial growth. The office
buildings, the shopping centers, the big
shopping centers. The major improvements, the
heavy investment. And Everhart is smothered.
A lot of quick improvements when there's only an
open belt. where people put in a little office
building here, but they can't get to it. The
congestion is so bad on the other part that no one
wants to be there now. So the offices that are
developing nicely are on Weber and on Staples,
where the road's 64 feet wide, or a little wider
maybe. where you have traffic lights every half
mile, and where you have left turn lanes, and all of
the conveniences that you have in a wider road.
Everhart's 50 feet in certain portions, and out
towards the country club for you. Right.
But I guess the people who have their offices along
Everhart are doing all right. They're fussing
about what the city's going to do about the
Everhart problem. Of course, the Everhart
problem shouldn't have been there if the zoning
plan had been followed. What was that, the
responsibility of the planning department? Oh,
no, no, this was just one of these things. It was
very well supported. I mean, our zoning plan was a
well-done document, and it was fought on every
lot. So there was so much resistance by the people
of the city to the plan? No, that's too grandiose.
Zoning deals with the people up and down the
street. The rest of the city couldn't care less. I
mean, the guardians of the zoning of the city are
the planning commission and the city council. The
citizens get involved only when they're within
200 feet of change. Then they hoot and holler. But
they don't even notice when the same thing's
happening someplace else. They just ignore it. So
if the city council was the guardian of the plan.
It's a big plan. But they're also the ones that have
to face reality. And for instance, in this case,
you had a lot of single family lots facing the
street. You can say, well, maybe the plan was
wrong. Maybe it was. Maybe the plan should have
said that we had to find some way to buy one of these
lots and widen the street. That would have been a
very practical alternative.
The only point I'm making here is that zoning, too,
has to be flexible. It has to change. And it can
guide the city quite well. And there's no doubt
that Bill Anderson's work and others in seeing
that the major streets were laid out in a somewhat
logical manner. Not logical the first time you're
in town, but I mean, if you've been there a little
while, they begin to make sense when you realize
you like the fingers of my hand. And they go off in
different directions. But the major streets are
there. Of course, the south part of the city,
that's probably shown even more distinctly than
any place else, where you really haven't had very
many zoning problems in the south part of the city,
where Alameda has been a very clear feeder street
and ocean drive and staples and the areas that
developed around those streets really quite
orderly and where they make sense. Good, solid
shopping centers that very rarely have
vacancies. And that's part of the test of whether
it's successful or not. Whether the buying power
is related to the quantity of commercial space in
the south part of the city, that's been done quite
well. Of course, it's also the more well-to-do
part of the city, so that makes it easier. Then we
can try to face the same problems in a lossy port
area.
Obviously, the city's grown tremendously. But
basically, the building's been provided for by
the whole city structure. I wouldn't call it
planning. It's differentiated from the rest of
management.
I lost my faith in capital improvement programs
quite a while ago. And even though I'm getting
ready to prepare one here, I just don't believe in
it anymore, even though I'm as wrapped up in it as
anybody could be. except to plan for what you can
actually do. Within a certain what range of years?
No, within a certain range of money. Of money?
Yeah. We stopped about 10 years ago in Corpus
Christi having capital programs. They're bond
programs. A bond program may be three or five
years, but still it's the only time it's really
christened in and adopted is at the time that
you're going to face that financing. Because
otherwise the planning program becomes just a
wish list. And then you get all kinds of false
expectations. You get people expecting those
things to happen on the schedules that are shown.
And then they become disgruntled if it doesn't
happen. They say, hey, you promised to pay this
street two years ago. Why isn't it paying? Oh, that
was a plan. That was our idea. We didn't have the
money at that time. And it's a very empty process.
It's a very empty process to be dealing with
physical needs, but without the money. Come here,
Flo. That's OK. OK.